---
title: "Negative Soundscaping - The Politics and Aesthetics of Noise Canceling Headphones within Urban Environments"
author: Yi-Tong Chen
publishedAt: "2025-06-19"
summary: "This essay proposes negative soundscaping to describe how noise-cancelling headphones actively shape urban sound by creating intentional silence. Using ideas from soundscape studies and postphenomenology, Chen argues that noise cancelling is not passive — it reshapes what we hear and don’t hear, adding aesthetic value and redistributing power over who gets quiet space in cities. The piece calls for recognizing this silence as both an artistic tool and a political issue, urging planners and designers to see quiet as a shared urban right, not just a private luxury."
---

# Background

With the commercialization and popularization of active noise canceling
(ANC) headphones, noise canceling technology and experience has become
increasingly accessible nowadays. In urban spaces, we see pedestrians
and coffee shop customers putting on noise cancelling headphones to
enjoy their personal "auditory bubbles" (Bull, 2005) --- a concept
coined by Michael Bull in the wake of the iPod era in early 2000s,
describing a personalized, movable sound experience, which is now
strengthened by the cutting edge technology of noise cancelling.

Accordingly, it is now crucial for urban sound studies to take the role
of noise cancelling experiences into its analysis framework. However, as
we will later explore, ambiguity in the interpretation of noise
cancelling still exists in terms of its role in shaping the acoustic
experience.

In this essay, I propose the concept of **"negative soundscaping"** as a
novel angle to approach the _active_ role of noise cancelling technology
in mediating human sound experience. After reviewing the epistemological
foothold for the study, and the present state of soundscape research, I
will provide support for the concept by analyzing the socio-technical
intentionality of noise cancelling headphones, as well as drawing
insights from past empirical studies to evidence the ways in which we
can actually "hear" the negative soundscape through the multi-sensory
experience of walking in the city. Finally, I will discuss the
aesthetic, political, and the phenomenological implications and
opportunities that can be drawn from the recognition of negative
soundscaping.

# Mediated Geography

The humanistic geography trend in the mid-20th century is a movement
that attempts to put human and human experience back to its place in the
study (Cresswell, 2012). Although humanistic geography is informed by
multiple philosophical and epistemological roots such as existentialism
and social interactionism, phenomenology, in particular, acted as an
important "rallying call" for the development of humanistic geography
studies (Ash & Simpson, 2016).

Geographers informed by phenomenology investigates the geography as
experienced by human, by exploring concepts such as the _lifeworld_
(Buttimer, 1976). As such, it embraces empiricism and embodied
experiences, and produces geographic knowledge that is grounded in the
world of experience (Entrikin, 1976).

It is worth noting that phenomenology, in itself, is formed by complex
series of debates, critiques and refutals. Critiques on the
phenomenological view on geography often involved its overly
subject-centered way of analysis, "relegating animals and objects to the
status of mere objects" (Cresswell, 2012), and its inability to attend
to the power relationships in the human-environment dynamics (Ash &
Simpson, 2016). One particular shortcoming of classical phenomenology
and a large part of humanistic geography is their "anti-technology"
narrative, which is especially evident in interpreting the modern world
increasingly embedded in environment-altering artifacts. They view
science and technology as a "alienating force" for human, creating
homogenized experiences and "placelessness" (Relph, 1976).

In recent years, there is a trend of reinterpreting the phenomenological
ideas and practices in geography, aiming to address its problems by
expanding the definition of what a experimental subject is (the
"human"), as well as what counts as an empirical field (the "world")
(Lea, 2009). Philosopher of science and technology Don Ihde first coined
the term of _postphenomenology_, which moves from the subject/object
model, and towards a pragmatist, interrelational phenomenology. By
recognizing and positioning technology into the human-environment
relational ontology, Ihde's work of Technology and the Lifeworld (Ihde, 1990) demonstrated the value of postphenomenology in explaining human
experience of the environment as mediated by technology.

Informed by Ihde's works as well as poststructuralist ideology,
postphenomenological geographers embraces more-than-human factors in
intentionality and experience (Cresswell, 2012). They aim to understand
_how_ the perceiving subject and the perceived environment comes about
through the mediation of factors such as social relationships and
technological conditions (Ash & Simpson, 2016). Postphenomenological
geographers also has a more romanticized view on technology
interventions compared to that of classical phenomenologists. They are
interested in the affective phenomenon created by the present of such
interventions, instead of criticizing them for creating "inauthentic"
experience of the world (Trigg, 2012).

As such, postphenomenological geography enables us to analyze the
politics and aesthetics in technology mediation of environments from a
more neutral manner. In this essay, we will leverage the strength of
this postphenomenological perspective to discuss the active mediating
role of noise cancelling headphones.

# Soundscaping and Noise Control

The term _soundscape_ was first coined by Michael Southworth, a city
planner in Boston, in his 1969 paper "The Sonic Environment of Cities",
where he used the term to describe how city sounds influence residents'
perceptions of urban spaces and activities (Southworth, 1969). Canadian
composer Murray Schafer played a pivotal role in popularizing and
expanding the concept through his work in the 1970s, particularly with
the World Soundscape Project and his influential book "The Tuning of the
World" (Schafer, 1993).

The conceptual framework of soundscape was standardized with ISO
12913-1:2014, which defines soundscape as "acoustic environment as
perceived or experienced and/or understood by a person or people, in
context" (International Organization for Standardization, 2014). The
standard also identifies different stages in the process of experiencing
soundscapes, which includes auditory sensation, interpretation of
auditory sensation, and emotional or behavioral responses. This emphasis
on human experience and comprehension of sound is in contrast with
_acoustic environment_, which represents the objective collection of all
sounds at the receiver (International Organization for Standardization,
2014).

Accordingly, the practice of _soundscaping_ is the intentional
modification of acoustic environment with the aim of creating sonic
experience that is functional and pleasant for people. Soundscaping goes
beyond the traditional approach of _noise control_, which aims to
suppress the absolute noise level by the decibels. Instead, it often
utilizes active creation of sounds in addition to noise reduction, in
order to create an acoustic environment that make functional or
aesthetic sense with the other aspects of the environment. As such,
soundscaping approaches adapts to different urban settings, such as
creating an eventful city center, or preserving "quiet areas" for
residential districts (Nusselder, 2021).

Key here is the intentionality that soundscaping exhibits through the
intentional designing and engineering of acoustic environment. The act
of soundscaping is often aesthetic-driven, as evidenced in the
subjective "pleasantness" axis frequently used in soundscape analysis
(Nusselder, 2021). At the same time, soundscaping is always value-laden,
which leads to debates such as "what counts as hi-fi and lo-fi sounds?"
(McCartney, 2016). These assessments is essential for our construction
for the concept of negative soundscape, as created by noise cancelling
technology.

# Noise Cancelling Headphones as Negative Soundscaping

Ever since the emergence of personal portable listening devices like
Walkmans and iPods, geographers have been examining the impact of such
technology on the urban auditory experiences. Michael Bull claimed that
the pedestrian's usage of iPod is creating a "privatized auditory
bubble" for city walkers, which enables them the "inhabit" the
placelessness in which they move across, such as the route of commute
(Bull, 2005). For minorities such as the teenagers, putting headphones
on can be a way to "reclaim" the public space, which is often beyond
their control (Keeffe & Kerr, 2015). In recent years, the rapid
development and commercialization of noise cancelling headphones (Cleer
Audio, 2023) presents itself as the latest frontier of this pursue for a
isolated personal sonic experience.

It appears, at this point, as if the "traditional" urban sound sources
has been obscured and erased to the point of irrelevance in the
placemaking process. However, in a postphenomenological way, here we
recognize the active role of noise cancelling as a radical way of
engaging with the urban environment --- an act of _negative
soundscaping_. In order to evident the intentionality that is
constitutive of soundscaping practices, I will analyze noise cancelling
from two theoretical angles: one of multi-sensory aesthetics, and one of
techno-social power distribution.

## The Aesthetics in Noise Cancelling

In the times before the prevalence of noise cancelling headphones, iPod
users were already aware of the aesthetic effect created by putting on
headphones when moving through the city. By selecting (or intentionally
not selecting) soundtracks of their liking, people ascribe personal
meanings to otherwise unfocused environments. In his interviews, Bull
discovered that, when listening in an urban setting, iPod users get a
feeling of watching a movie or _music video_. The visual of the
surroundings "seem to work in tandem somehow with the music", and
"dramatizes things a bit" (Bull, 2005). Sociologist Jean-Paul Thibaud
attributes this "aesthetization" and "spetacularization" of visual
environments through personal soundtracks to the _"visiophonic knot"_
between the listener and the urban environment (Thibaud, 2003). In this
regard, the _positive_ sound waves that is iPod users' chosen music
constitutes a soundscaping element in their urban experience in a
aesthetic way.

In the case of _negative_ sound waves produced by noise cancelling
headphones, however, it seems like they lacks the meaning-ascribing
ability of soundtracks and music, acting only in a passive capacity to
reduce the distortion of an intended acoustic environment. However, as
we will later explore, by actively detecting environmental sounds and
negating them, noise cancelling algorithms exhibits an aesthetic
intentionality of muting the sounds created by the visible surroundings,
which manifests as an practice of active acoustic experience creation.

In movies and other forms of visual storytelling, intentional silence is
a common technique to create tension, convey emotions, and facilitate
audience immersion (Tiwari, 2023). In analyzing what he calls the
_audiovisual silence_ in filmmaking, Torras i Segura stressed the
importance of visual and musical context in shaping the meaning and
symbolism behind such aesthetic silence (Torras i Segura, 2022). A scene
of an arguing couple with the content of their argument muted make the
audience focus on the emotional state of the character, the tension in
the atmosphere, and the higher-level dramatic implication of the scene.
Likewise, when we see a car whizzing by the street without a roaring
sound, we do not just passively accept a lack of sonic expression from
the visible environment. Instead, we _hear_ the silence by its very
absence. By actively dampening and negating the urban noise, we see the
pulse of the city from a more abstract angle, which produces auditory
sensations that does not exist otherwise.

In this sense, we can argue that the negative sound waves generated from
the noise cancelling algorithms ascribes aesthetic choices and meanings
to the visual element in the environment, just like their positive
counterparts. Thus, we proposes that noise cancelling constitutes an act
of soundscaping of its own right --- an act of _negative soundscaping_.

## The Power in Noise Cancelling

The usage of noise cancelling technology in creating personal sonic
experience is also significant from a techno-social standpoint.
Specifically, it presents a re-distribution of power.

Noise-cancelling headphones do far more than attenuate decibels; they
reorganize the very distribution of power between listener and milieu.
Active noise cancelling can be read as a concrete instantiation of what
Erich Hörl calls _environmentality_---a regime in which control is
exercised not by enclosing bodies in fixed spaces, but by continuously
_tuning_ an environment around them (Hörl & Schott, 2018). It also
reflects Gilles Deleuze's observation of the shift of power distribution
from disciplinary "molds" to cybernetic "modulations" (Deleuze, 1992).

From this angle, Valentin Ris argues that noise cancelling headphone
becomes an _environmental technology_---a responsive medium that redraws
the subject/space relation on the fly (Ris, 2021). Inside the ear-cup,
real-time algorithms capture external sound, calculate an inverse
waveform, and inject it back into the micro-acoustic cavity. The result
is a privatized zone of auditory governance, and what appears as silence
is therefore an _active_ signal of power: a continuous feedback loop
that disciplines the sonic field without ever appearing coercive.

In sound researcher Mack Hogood's reading, this in-ear micro-politics
dovetails with larger neoliberal logics of self-optimization, with noise
being socially constructed and situated in hierarchies of race, class,
and gender (Hagood, 2019). He claims that:

> When the "normal" perception of noise is already suffused with
> unexamined race, class, and gender ideologies, the production and use
> of noise-cancelling technologies can never be neutral. (Hagood, 2019)

Marketing campaigns --- Sony's WF-1000XM series, for instance --- depict
predominantly white, middle-class men who "regain control" over chaotic
streets or open-plan offices the moment they activate ANC. Here noise is
racialized, gendered, and spatialized as an external irritant to be
neutralized, while the empowered consumer becomes a node of autonomous
regulation (Ris, 2021). The headphone thus becomes a commodified
infrastructure of _negative soundscaping_: it produces a curated,
_opinionated_ emptiness, in which the individual can work harder, rest
easier, or simply feel "free".

Seen through this lens, negative soundscaping is political twice over.
First, it extends the reach of auditory capitalism into sensory
experience --- much as Spotify's recommendation system algorithmically
sculpts the what music should be experienced (Franklin, 2023; Tofalvy &
Koltai, 2023), noise cancelling sculpts _what silence should sound
like_. Second, it naturalizes a paradigm in which responsibility for
managing environmental stress is shifted from collective urban planning
to personal technology consumption (Hagood, 2019). By foregrounding the
intentionality in the process of creating _an experience of absence_,
noise-cancelling headphones materialize a contemporary form of power,
which makes the silence itself speak.

# Implications

## Political Considerations

On a political level, the concept of negative soundscaping highlights
how the creation of "silence" is never neutral or apolitical. What
counts as unwanted noise is often socially constructed, mapped onto
existing hierarchies of race, class, and gender. By privatizing silence
as a consumer good, ANC technology risks reinforcing those power
divisions and treating acoustic comfort as a luxury rather than a common
right.

Recognizing this dynamic opens the door to critique and change -- it
encourages urban planners and policymakers to value quiet as a shared
urban resource, not just a premium experience for the equipped. By
acknowledging the politics behind who gets to tune out city noise (and
who cannot), we can also push for more inclusive participation of
_silence design_ in noise-cancelling technology, which recognizes and
addresses the social positionality of noise.

## Aesthetic Opputunities

In silencing parts of the city's sound palette, noise-cancelling
headphones do more than subtract -- they _add_ a new sensibility to what
remains. The absence of expected noises (a honking horn, a ringing
phone) becomes perceptible and meaningful -- a deliberate quieting that
can heighten one's awareness of subtler sounds or visual details. This
suggests that silence itself can function as an aesthetic layer,
imparting its own mood and focus.

Such experiences hint at creative opportunities. Designers and artists
might deliberately integrate negative soundscaping -- using active noise
reduction as a real-time "audio mixing" tool (e.g. Haas et al., 2020) to
shape perception. Embracing these possibilities means treating quiet not
just as the void between sounds, but as a designed space in its own
right.

# Conclusion

Framing noise-cancelling as negative soundscaping invites a more nuanced
and hopeful outlook on the future of urban sound. It acknowledges the
power dynamics and ethical questions at play, yet also recognizes the
potential for positive change.

Ultimately, negative soundscaping underscores that silence is not a mere
absence, but a presence we create -- and in that creation lies an
opportunity to reshape our cities' soundscapes with intention, to listen
more carefully to both the noise and the quiet, and to harmonize the
relationship between our technology, our senses, and our shared sonic
experience.

# References

Ash, J., & Simpson, P. (2016). Geography and post-phenomenology. _Progress in Human Geography_, _40_(1), 48–66. [https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132514544806](https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132514544806)

Bull, M. (2005). No Dead Air! The iPod and the Culture of Mobile Listening. _Leisure Studies_, _24_(4), 343–355. [https://doi.org/10.1080/0261436052000330447](https://doi.org/10.1080/0261436052000330447)

Buttimer, A. (1976). Grasping the Dynamism of Lifeworld. _Annals of the Association of American Geographers_, _66_(2), 277–292. [https://www.jstor.org/stable/2562470](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2562470)

Cleer Audio. (2023, April 23). _Noise cancelling wireless headphones: Rapid growth in the dynamism of tech industry_. [https://cleeraudio.com/noise-cancelling-wireless-headphones-rapid-growth-in-the-dynamism-of-tech-industry/](https://cleeraudio.com/noise-cancelling-wireless-headphones-rapid-growth-in-the-dynamism-of-tech-industry/)

Cresswell, T. (2012). _Geographic thought: a critical introduction_ (Second edition). Wiley Blackwell.

Deleuze, G. (1992). Postscript on the Societies of Control. _October_, _59_, 3–7. [https://www.jstor.org/stable/778828](https://www.jstor.org/stable/778828)

Entrikin, J. N. (1976). Contemporary Humanism in Geography. _Annals of the Association of American Geographers_, _66_(4), 615–632. [https://www.jstor.org/stable/2569260](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2569260)

Franklin, M. I. (2023). Global Music Politics: Whose Playlist for Troubled Times? _Current History_, _122_(840), 29–35. [https://doi.org/10.1525/curh.2023.122.840.29](https://doi.org/10.1525/curh.2023.122.840.29)

Haas, G., Stemasov, E., Rietzler, M., & Rukzio, E. (2020). Interactive Auditory Mediated Reality: Towards User-defined Personal Soundscapes. _Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference_, 2035–2050. [https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395493](https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395493)

Hagood, M. (2019). _Hush: Media and Sonic Self-Control_. Duke University Press. [https://doi.org/10.1215/9781478004479](https://doi.org/10.1215/9781478004479)

Hörl, E., & Schott, N. F. (2018). The Environmentalitarian Situation: Reflections on the Becoming-Environmental of Thinking, Power, and Capital. _Cultural Politics_, _14_(2), 153–173. [https://muse.jhu.edu/pub/4/article/701168](https://muse.jhu.edu/pub/4/article/701168)

Ihde, D. (1990). _Technology and the Lifeworld: From Garden to Earth_. Indiana University Press.

International Organization for Standardization. (2014). _Acoustics. Soundscape: Definition and conceptual framework_. BSI British Standards. [https://doi.org/10.3403/30260178U](https://doi.org/10.3403/30260178U)

Keeffe, L. O., & Kerr, A. (2015). Reclaiming Public Space: Sound and Mobile Media Use by Teenagers. _International Journal of Communication_. [https://mural.maynoothuniversity.ie/7025/](https://mural.maynoothuniversity.ie/7025/)

Lea, J. J. (2009). _Post-phenomenology/post-phenomenological geographies_ (R. Kitchin & N. Thrift, Eds.; Vol. 8, pp. 373–378). Elsevier. [https://centaur.reading.ac.uk/2039/](https://centaur.reading.ac.uk/2039/)

McCartney, A. (2016). Ethical Questions about Working with Soundscapes. _Organised Sound_, _21_(2), 160–165. [https://doi.org/10.1017/S135577181600008X](https://doi.org/10.1017/S135577181600008X)

Nusselder, R. (2021). _Quiet areas, soundscaping and urban sound planning_. European Network of the Heads of Environment Protection Agencies (EPA Network).

Relph, E. (with Internet Archive). (1976). _Place and placelessness_. London : Pion. [http://archive.org/details/placeplacelessne0000relp](http://archive.org/details/placeplacelessne0000relp)

Ris, V. (2021). The Environmentalization of space and listening: An archaeology of noise-cancelling headphones and Spotify’s concentration playlists. _SoundEffects - An Interdisciplinary Journal of Sound and Sound Experience_, _10_(1), Article 1. [https://doi.org/10.7146/se.v10i1.124204](https://doi.org/10.7146/se.v10i1.124204)

Schafer, R. M. (1993). _Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and the Tuning of the World_. Inner Traditions International, Limited.

Southworth, M. (1969). The Sonic Environment of Cities. _Environment and Behavior_, _1_(1), 49–70. [https://doi.org/10.1177/001391656900100104](https://doi.org/10.1177/001391656900100104)

Thibaud, J.-P. (2003). _The sonic composition of the city_.

Tiwari, S. (2023). Exploring the Aesthetic and Technical Significance of Silence in Modern Cinema: A Case Study of Sound of Metal. _International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR), ISSN: 2319-7064_. [https://doi.org/10.21275/MR23811220356](https://doi.org/10.21275/MR23811220356)

Tofalvy, T., & Koltai, J. (2023). “Splendid Isolation”: The reproduction of music industry inequalities in Spotify’s recommendation system. _New Media & Society_, _25_(7), 1580–1604. [https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448211022161](https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448211022161)

Torras i Segura, D. (2022). Understanding Audiovisual Silence. Proposal of an Analytical Model. _Quarterly Review of Film and Video_, _39_(1), 74–102. [https://doi.org/10.1080/10509208.2020.1807283](https://doi.org/10.1080/10509208.2020.1807283)

Trigg, D. (2012). _The Memory of Place: a Phenomenology of the Uncanny_. [https://www.academia.edu/355785/The*Memory_of_Place_a_Phenomenology_of_the_Uncanny_2012*](https://www.academia.edu/355785/The_Memory_of_Place_a_Phenomenology_of_the_Uncanny_2012_)
